[Music]
this is dead horse
250 miles north of the Arctic Circle and
one of the coldest remotest settlements
on earth
deadhorse only exists because there are
huge reserves of oil to be extracted
from below the ice it's not the most
welcoming place for a tiny arctic fox
[Music]
first he has to get past the local
heavies
red foxes followed the oil workers here
and they've made themselves at home
twice the size of the arctic fox he's
quite capable of killing any trespassers
on his patch but the little fox is
hungry enough to take the risk
[Music]
everyone knows you shouldn't put bare
flesh on freezing metal
[Music]
but the Fox has to use his tongue to
thaw out the frozen scrub
[Music]
it's a kind of place where you have to
hold your nerve
[Music]
the freezing temperatures don't stop the
oil workers going about their business
winter is a good time to get those
awkward little jobs out of the way like
moving a 2,000 ton drilling rig to a new
field
probably best not to try and push your
luck too far
[Music]
even trees struggled to take root in the
icy soil but life is possible even here
an Arctic ground squirrel he spends his
entire winter asleep I would like a
light for eight months straight the
longest deepest hibernation of any
animal on earth this extreme lifestyle
can only be seen using a special filming
burrow he's pretty much stopped
breathing
his heart is barely beating
the Sun is getting higher every day
and the darkness of his burrow
the squirrels body clock drags him out
of bed there's no time to waste
last time he saw it back in the autumn
this was his territory now he's got to
fight for it all over again
for the next two weeks you barely have
time even to eat
[Music]
it's a constant battle to keep rival
males off his turf
[Music]
there's a sense of anticipation in the
air
females a marriage a few days later he
won't want to miss his first date and
there she is
[Music]
but what's he doing she'll only be fair
tile for 12 hours in the entire year
there's no time for hesitation
[Music]
he cautiously makes his move
she might be in a hurry but she can
still be choosy
[Music]
he knows that while there are other
males around she could easily go off
with someone else
so he won't leave her sight for 24 hours
[Music]
and Alaskan spring moves fast and if you
don't seize the moment it will pass you
by a Sammy family has agreed to teach me
everything we know about the Northern
Lights reindeer and surviving in the
Arctic wilderness and I've come this far
north to meet Oh
I'm Gordon thanks to media pitchy
so I read it's very it's rude to ask
someone how many reindeer they have is
that correct money in the bank you have
I have no money in the bank
I can see this 40 at least here so these
is I don't want to know I don't if it's
rich I don't want to know I can count
them patchy mattis started looking after
reindeer when he was just two years old
he comes from a long line of Sami
reindeer herders
and still follows the traditional ways
so you shoes is that reindeer fur yes
yeah what's much better what you have
Noddy and it's really best fun when
there's 130 minus 40 and I called us
with this beam it's 1999 China we're
just one week and there's minus 50 right
oh really so when it's down as low as
minus 50 you don't see reindeer shaking
and shivering no if they get enough food
in the forest no problem with that cold
weather
reindeer evolved during the Ice Age
there are reports of them living in
temperatures as low as minus 17 Petre
leaves me in charge of feeding time so I
can take a closer look at these
incredible animals hey you over here it
is amazing to be eyeball to eyeball nose
to nose with a reindeer
the first thing I'm struck by is their
winter coat which is up to 7 centimeters
thick fur covers almost every part of
their body it's almost impossible to
sink my hand into this dense fur it is
unbelievably thick you can't part the
hairs and see the skin beneath not only
is he hair super thick but each one of
these hair fibers is is hollow so the
animal is insulated and each individual
here is insulated with that ear void in
the middle everything about them from
their feet to the tops of their antlers
from the tip of the nose the end of the
tail they adapted to survive in one of
the harshest environments on earth
[Applause]
this is the great rhubari sand sea in
the heart of the Sahara these swallows
have traveled 1 and a half thousand
miles since they left Nigeria their
superpowers of navigation will
eventually guide them to Europe but now
they and other thirsty migrants need to
find a speck of blue amidst this ocean
of sand and here it is
mell MA
[Music]
here to ancient groundwater wells up to
the surface
[Music]
but the birds need to be careful for the
sons has played a terrible trick
this Oasis is poisonous
intense evaporation over thousands of
years has left the water saltier than
the sea as if to underline the horror
the place is infested by vast swarms of
flies
[Applause]
but this plague is a bird salvation the
Flies are filled with fresh water
filtered from the brine
so like a desert wanderer squeezing a
drink from a cactus the birds get all
the water they need from the fly's
bodies
[Music]
more and more migrants join in what else
this is the birds only stopover they
give them enough fuel to escape from the
Sahara and Africa to help her in her
quest she's equipped with three
superpowers first an amazing approach to
getting about Porsche is a jumping
spider able to leap up to 50 times their
own body length nowhere seems beyond her
reach
next a second superpower superb eyesight
[Music]
essential if sees to distinguish her
prey in all this cutter because her prey
doesn't stray Portia is a spider eating
spider this raises a few problems her
lunch is three times her size
packed with venom and surrounded by a
sticky trap mission impossible
not at all because of her third
superpower Portia is a genius
she can map her world in three
dimensions and formulate a plan of
attack
[Music]
she can have an idea
the web builder is blind it won't have a
clue that she's coming
[Music]
right on target and safely behind those
fangs but a mind as active as Portia's
can always do with more brain food here
there's no anchor point for the abseil
but Porsche has another idea instead of
going to the spider
[Music]
she will bring the spider to her she
plucks the strands to imitate struggling
prey drawing the spider in to its death
you
[Music]